docs/src/docs/asciidoc/bindings.adoc, before:

= Bindings and Actions
:doctype: book
:icons: font
:source-highlighter: highlight.js
:toc: left
:toclevels: 3

include::_attributes.adoc[]

{project-name} separates physical input (keys, mouse clicks) from semantic actions.
Instead of checking for specific keys everywhere, you define bindings that map inputs to actions like "moveUp" or "delete".

== Predefined Binding Sets

Several binding presets are available:

[source,java]
----
Bindings standard = BindingSets.standard();  // Arrow keys, Enter, Escape
Bindings vim = BindingSets.vim();            // hjkl navigation, Ctrl+u/d
Bindings emacs = BindingSets.emacs();        // Ctrl+n/p/f/b navigation
----

== Matching Actions in Events

Events carry binding information. Use semantic checks instead of hardcoding keys:

[source,java]
----
// Semantic - works with any binding set
if (event.isUp()) { }
if (event.isSelect()) { }
if (event.matches("delete")) { }

// Low-level - when you need specific keys
if (event.isChar('x')) { }
if (event.isKey(KeyCode.F1)) { }
----

The `is*()` methods delegate to the current bindings.
With vim bindings, `isUp()` matches Up arrow, `k`, or `Ctrl+p`.
With standard bindings, it only matches the Up arrow.

== Key Triggers

`KeyTrigger` defines what input triggers an action:

[source,java]
----
KeyTrigger.key(KeyCode.UP)           // Arrow key
KeyTrigger.ch('j')                   // Character
KeyTrigger.chIgnoreCase('j')         // j or J
KeyTrigger.ctrl('u')                 // Ctrl+U
KeyTrigger.alt('x')                  // Alt+X
----

=== Terminal Compatibility

[IMPORTANT]
====
**Ctrl key bindings have significant limitations** due to how terminals encode keyboard input.

When you press a key combination like Ctrl+A, the terminal does not send "Ctrl" + "A" separately.
Instead, it sends a single ASCII control character (byte value 1 for Ctrl+A).
This encoding dates back to the 1970s and causes several problems:

* **Ctrl+letter (a-z)**: Works, but case information is lost. Ctrl+a and Ctrl+Shift+A send the same byte.
* **Ctrl+number**: Unreliable. Ctrl+2, Ctrl+@, and Ctrl+Space all send the same byte (0). The original key cannot be determined.
* **Ctrl+Alt+key**: Inconsistent across terminals.

**Alt key bindings are more reliable** because terminals send ESC followed by the actual character:

* Alt+a sends `ESC` + `'a'` - we know it was lowercase 'a'
* Alt+A sends `ESC` + `'A'` - we know it was uppercase 'A' (shifted)
* Alt+2 sends `ESC` + `'2'` - we know it was '2'
====

**Recommendation for custom bindings:**

[cols="1,1,2",options="header"]
|===
|Modifier |Reliability |Notes

|`Alt+letter`
|Excellent
|Preserves case, works consistently

|`Alt+number`
|Excellent
|Fully distinguishable

|`Ctrl+letter`
|Good
|Works but loses shift information

|`Ctrl+number`
|Poor
|Avoid - ambiguous with other combinations
|===

For maximum compatibility, prefer `Alt+key` bindings for custom actions.
Use `Ctrl+key` only for well-established conventions (Ctrl+C, Ctrl+S, Ctrl+Z, etc.).

== Mouse Triggers

[source,java]
----
MouseTrigger.click()                 // Left click
MouseTrigger.rightClick()            // Right click
MouseTrigger.ctrlClick()             // Ctrl+click
MouseTrigger.scrollUp()              // Scroll wheel
MouseTrigger.drag(MouseButton.LEFT)  // Dragging
----

== Custom Bindings

Start from a preset and customize:

[source,java]
----
Bindings custom = BindingSets.standard()
    .toBuilder()
    .bind(KeyTrigger.ch('d'), "delete")
    .bind(KeyTrigger.key(KeyCode.DELETE), "delete")
    .bind(KeyTrigger.ctrl('s'), "save")
    .bind(MouseTrigger.rightClick(), "contextMenu")
    .build();
----

== ActionHandler

For centralized action handling, use `ActionHandler`:

[source,java]
----
ActionHandler actions = new ActionHandler(BindingSets.vim())
    .on(Actions.QUIT, e -> runner.quit())
    .on("save", e -> save())
    .on("delete", e -> deleteSelected());

// In your event handler:
(event, runner) -> {
    if (actions.dispatch(event)) {
        return true;  // Action was handled
    }
    // Handle other events...
    return false;
}
----

Handlers can optionally receive the action name that triggered them:

[source,java]
----
// Handler with action name (useful when same handler serves multiple actions)
ActionHandler actions = new ActionHandler(bindings)
    .on("red", (event, action) -> setColor(action))
    .on("blue", (event, action) -> setColor(action))
    .on("green", (event, action) -> setColor(action));
----

== @OnAction Annotation

In Toolkit components, annotate methods to handle actions:

[source,java]
----
public class EditorComponent extends Component<EditorComponent> {
    private List<String> lines = new ArrayList<>();
    private int cursor = 0;

    @OnAction(Actions.MOVE_UP)
    void moveCursorUp(Event event) {
        if (cursor > 0) cursor--;
    }

    @OnAction(Actions.MOVE_DOWN)
    void moveCursorDown(Event event) {
        if (cursor < lines.size() - 1) cursor++;
    }

    @OnAction("delete")
    void deleteLine(Event event) {
        if (!lines.isEmpty()) {
            lines.remove(cursor);
        }
    }
}
----

The component framework discovers these methods and dispatches events automatically.

=== Annotation Processing

By default, `@OnAction` methods are discovered at runtime using reflection.
For better startup performance and GraalVM native image compatibility, use the annotation processor to generate action handler registrations at compile time.

==== Gradle (Kotlin DSL)

[source,kotlin,subs="+attributes"]
----
dependencies {
    implementation("{maven-group}:{toolkit-module}:{project-version}")
    annotationProcessor("{maven-group}:{processor-module}:{project-version}")
}
----

==== Gradle (Groovy DSL)

[source,groovy,subs="+attributes"]
----
dependencies {
    implementation '{maven-group}:{toolkit-module}:{project-version}'
    annotationProcessor '{maven-group}:{processor-module}:{project-version}'
}
----

==== Maven

[source,xml,subs="+attributes"]
----
<dependencies>
    <dependency>
        <groupId>{maven-group}</groupId>
        <artifactId>{toolkit-module}</artifactId>
        <version>{project-version}</version>
    </dependency>
</dependencies>

<build>
    <plugins>
        <plugin>
            <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
            <artifactId>maven-compiler-plugin</artifactId>
            <version>3.13.0</version>
            <configuration>
                <annotationProcessorPaths>
                    <path>
                        <groupId>{maven-group}</groupId>
                        <artifactId>{processor-module}</artifactId>
                        <version>{project-version}</version>
                    </path>
                </annotationProcessorPaths>
            </configuration>
        </plugin>
    </plugins>
</build>
----

The processor generates a `_ActionHandlerRegistrar` class for each component with `@OnAction` methods.
These registrars are discovered via `ServiceLoader` and register action handlers without reflection.

== Loading Bindings from Files

Bindings can be externalized to properties files:

[source,java]
----
// From classpath
Bindings bindings = BindingSets.loadResource("/my-bindings.properties");

// From filesystem
Bindings bindings = BindingSets.load(Paths.get("~/.config/myapp/bindings.properties"));
----

Property file format:

[source,properties]
----
# Navigation
moveUp = Up, k
moveDown = Down, j
pageUp = PageUp, Ctrl+u
pageDown = PageDown, Ctrl+d

# Actions
select = Enter, Space
cancel = Escape
delete = d, Delete

# Mouse
click = Mouse.Left.Press
contextMenu = Mouse.Right.Press
----

Multiple triggers for the same action are comma-separated.
Modifiers use `Ctrl+`, `Alt+`, `Shift+` prefixes.

== Standard Actions

The `Actions` class defines common action names:

[cols="1,2",options="header"]
|===
|Action |Description

|`MOVE_UP`, `MOVE_DOWN`, `MOVE_LEFT`, `MOVE_RIGHT`
|Navigation

|`PAGE_UP`, `PAGE_DOWN`, `HOME`, `END`
|Page navigation

|`SELECT`, `CONFIRM`, `CANCEL`
|Selection and confirmation

|`FOCUS_NEXT`, `FOCUS_PREVIOUS`
|Focus navigation (Tab/Shift+Tab)

|`DELETE_BACKWARD`, `DELETE_FORWARD`
|Text editing

|`QUIT`
|Application exit
|===

== Next Steps

* link:api-levels.html[API Levels] - choosing between immediate mode, TuiRunner, and Toolkit
* link:mvc-architecture.html[Application Structure] - patterns for larger applications

Commit message:

Reorganize docs
This commit reorganizes docs and fixes several errors, terminology
problems and missing widgets which were due to inconsistent/fast
evolution of the API. The docs now make it clearer what is widget,
what is toolkit, etc.

docs/src/docs/asciidoc/bindings.adoc, after:

= Bindings and Actions
:doctype: book
:icons: font
:source-highlighter: highlight.js
:toc: left
:toclevels: 3

include::_attributes.adoc[]

{project-name} separates physical input (keys, mouse clicks) from semantic actions.
Instead of checking for specific keys everywhere, you define bindings that map inputs to actions like "moveUp" or "delete".

== Predefined Binding Sets

Several binding presets are available:

[source,java]
----
Bindings standard = BindingSets.standard();  // Arrow keys, Enter, Escape
Bindings vim = BindingSets.vim();            // hjkl navigation, Ctrl+u/d
Bindings emacs = BindingSets.emacs();        // Ctrl+n/p/f/b navigation
----

== Matching Actions in Events

Events carry binding information. Use semantic checks instead of hardcoding keys:

[source,java]
----
// Semantic - works with any binding set
if (event.isUp()) { }
if (event.isSelect()) { }
if (event.matches("delete")) { }

// Low-level - when you need specific keys
if (event.isChar('x')) { }
if (event.isKey(KeyCode.F1)) { }
----

The `is*()` methods delegate to the current bindings.
With vim bindings, `isUp()` matches Up arrow, `k`, or `Ctrl+p`.
With standard bindings, it only matches the Up arrow.

== Key Triggers

`KeyTrigger` defines what input triggers an action:

[source,java]
----
KeyTrigger.key(KeyCode.UP)           // Arrow key
KeyTrigger.ch('j')                   // Character
KeyTrigger.chIgnoreCase('j')         // j or J
KeyTrigger.ctrl('u')                 // Ctrl+U
KeyTrigger.alt('x')                  // Alt+X
----

=== Terminal Compatibility

[IMPORTANT]
====
**Ctrl key bindings have significant limitations** due to how terminals encode keyboard input.

When you press a key combination like Ctrl+A, the terminal does not send "Ctrl" + "A" separately.
Instead, it sends a single ASCII control character (byte value 1 for Ctrl+A).
This encoding dates back to the 1970s and causes several problems:

* **Ctrl+letter (a-z)**: Works, but case information is lost. Ctrl+a and Ctrl+Shift+A send the same byte.
* **Ctrl+number**: Unreliable. Ctrl+2, Ctrl+@, and Ctrl+Space all send the same byte (0). The original key cannot be determined.
* **Ctrl+Alt+key**: Inconsistent across terminals.

**Alt key bindings are more reliable** because terminals send ESC followed by the actual character:

* Alt+a sends `ESC` + `'a'` - we know it was lowercase 'a'
* Alt+A sends `ESC` + `'A'` - we know it was uppercase 'A' (shifted)
* Alt+2 sends `ESC` + `'2'` - we know it was '2'
====

**Recommendation for custom bindings:**

[cols="1,1,2",options="header"]
|===
|Modifier |Reliability |Notes

|`Alt+letter`
|Excellent
|Preserves case, works consistently

|`Alt+number`
|Excellent
|Fully distinguishable

|`Ctrl+letter`
|Good
|Works but loses shift information

|`Ctrl+number`
|Poor
|Avoid - ambiguous with other combinations
|===

For maximum compatibility, prefer `Alt+key` bindings for custom actions.
Use `Ctrl+key` only for well-established conventions (Ctrl+C, Ctrl+S, Ctrl+Z, etc.).

== Mouse Triggers

[source,java]
----
MouseTrigger.click()                 // Left click
MouseTrigger.rightClick()            // Right click
MouseTrigger.ctrlClick()             // Ctrl+click
MouseTrigger.scrollUp()              // Scroll wheel
MouseTrigger.drag(MouseButton.LEFT)  // Dragging
----

== Custom Bindings

Start from a preset and customize:

[source,java]
----
Bindings custom = BindingSets.standard()
    .toBuilder()
    .bind(KeyTrigger.ch('d'), "delete")
    .bind(KeyTrigger.key(KeyCode.DELETE), "delete")
    .bind(KeyTrigger.ctrl('s'), "save")
    .bind(MouseTrigger.rightClick(), "contextMenu")
    .build();
----

== ActionHandler

For centralized action handling, use `ActionHandler`:

[source,java]
----
ActionHandler actions = new ActionHandler(BindingSets.vim())
    .on(Actions.QUIT, e -> runner.quit())
    .on("save", e -> save())
    .on("delete", e -> deleteSelected());

// In your event handler:
(event, runner) -> {
    if (actions.dispatch(event)) {
        return true;  // Action was handled
    }
    // Handle other events...
    return false;
}
----

Handlers can optionally receive the action name that triggered them:

[source,java]
----
// Handler with action name (useful when same handler serves multiple actions)
ActionHandler actions = new ActionHandler(bindings)
    .on("red", (event, action) -> setColor(action))
    .on("blue", (event, action) -> setColor(action))
    .on("green", (event, action) -> setColor(action));
----

== @OnAction Annotation

[NOTE]
The `@OnAction` annotation works with Toolkit Components.
For TuiRunner or immediate mode, use `ActionHandler` instead (see above).

In Toolkit components, annotate methods to handle actions:

[source,java]
----
public class EditorComponent extends Component<EditorComponent> {
    private List<String> lines = new ArrayList<>();
    private int cursor = 0;

    @OnAction(Actions.MOVE_UP)
    void moveCursorUp(Event event) {
        if (cursor > 0) cursor--;
    }

    @OnAction(Actions.MOVE_DOWN)
    void moveCursorDown(Event event) {
        if (cursor < lines.size() - 1) cursor++;
    }

    @OnAction("delete")
    void deleteLine(Event event) {
        if (!lines.isEmpty()) {
            lines.remove(cursor);
        }
    }
}
----

The component framework discovers these methods and dispatches events automatically.

=== Annotation Processing

By default, `@OnAction` methods are discovered at runtime using reflection.
For better startup performance and GraalVM native image compatibility, use the annotation processor to generate action handler registrations at compile time.

==== Gradle (Kotlin DSL)

[source,kotlin,subs="+attributes"]
----
dependencies {
    implementation("{maven-group}:{toolkit-module}:{project-version}")
    annotationProcessor("{maven-group}:{processor-module}:{project-version}")
}
----

==== Gradle (Groovy DSL)

[source,groovy,subs="+attributes"]
----
dependencies {
    implementation '{maven-group}:{toolkit-module}:{project-version}'
    annotationProcessor '{maven-group}:{processor-module}:{project-version}'
}
----

==== Maven

[source,xml,subs="+attributes"]
----
<dependencies>
    <dependency>
        <groupId>{maven-group}</groupId>
        <artifactId>{toolkit-module}</artifactId>
        <version>{project-version}</version>
    </dependency>
</dependencies>

<build>
    <plugins>
        <plugin>
            <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
            <artifactId>maven-compiler-plugin</artifactId>
            <version>3.13.0</version>
            <configuration>
                <annotationProcessorPaths>
                    <path>
                        <groupId>{maven-group}</groupId>
                        <artifactId>{processor-module}</artifactId>
                        <version>{project-version}</version>
                    </path>
                </annotationProcessorPaths>
            </configuration>
        </plugin>
    </plugins>
</build>
----

The processor generates a `_ActionHandlerRegistrar` class for each component with `@OnAction` methods.
These registrars are discovered via `ServiceLoader` and register action handlers without reflection.

== Loading Bindings from Files

Bindings can be externalized to properties files:

[source,java]
----
// From classpath
Bindings bindings = BindingSets.loadResource("/my-bindings.properties");

// From filesystem
Bindings bindings = BindingSets.load(Paths.get("~/.config/myapp/bindings.properties"));
----

Property file format:

[source,properties]
----
# Navigation
moveUp = Up, k
moveDown = Down, j
pageUp = PageUp, Ctrl+u
pageDown = PageDown, Ctrl+d

# Actions
select = Enter, Space
cancel = Escape
delete = d, Delete

# Mouse
click = Mouse.Left.Press
contextMenu = Mouse.Right.Press
----

Multiple triggers for the same action are comma-separated.
Modifiers use `Ctrl+`, `Alt+`, `Shift+` prefixes.

== Standard Actions

The `Actions` class defines common action names:

[cols="1,2",options="header"]
|===
|Action |Description

|`MOVE_UP`, `MOVE_DOWN`, `MOVE_LEFT`, `MOVE_RIGHT`
|Navigation

|`PAGE_UP`, `PAGE_DOWN`, `HOME`, `END`
|Page navigation

|`SELECT`, `CONFIRM`, `CANCEL`
|Selection and confirmation

|`FOCUS_NEXT`, `FOCUS_PREVIOUS`
|Focus navigation (Tab/Shift+Tab)

|`DELETE_BACKWARD`, `DELETE_FORWARD`
|Text editing

|`QUIT`
|Application exit
|===

== Next Steps

* link:api-levels.html[API Levels] - choosing between immediate mode, TuiRunner, and Toolkit
* link:mvc-architecture.html[Application Structure] - patterns for larger applications
