docs/src/docs/asciidoc/core-concepts.adoc, before:

= Core Concepts
:doctype: book
:icons: font
:source-highlighter: highlight.js
:toc: left
:toclevels: 3

include::_attributes.adoc[]

{project-name}'s architecture follows https://ratatui.rs[ratatui] closely.
If you've used ratatui before, the concepts here will be familiar - `Buffer`, `Cell`, `Frame`, `Widget`, `Layout` all work the same way.

== Rendering Model

{project-name} uses *immediate-mode rendering* with an *intermediate buffer system*:

1. **Widgets render to a Buffer** - not directly to the terminal
2. **Buffer is diffed** - only changed cells are sent to the terminal
3. **Each frame is a full redraw** - simple state management, no retained state in widgets

[source]
----
Application State
       │
       ▼
┌─────────────┐      ┌─────────────┐      ┌─────────────┐
│   Widgets   │ ───▶ │   Buffer    │ ───▶ │  Terminal   │
│   render()  │      │  (diff)     │      │  (output)   │
└─────────────┘      └─────────────┘      └─────────────┘
----

This model makes {project-name} applications easy to reason about: the UI is always a pure function of your application state.

== Buffer System

=== Buffer

A `Buffer` is a 2D grid of `Cell` objects representing the terminal screen:

[source,java]
----
// A Buffer is created for each frame
Buffer buffer = new Buffer(width, height);

// Set a cell at position (x, y)
buffer.setCell(x, y, Cell.of('A', Style.EMPTY.fg(Color.RED)));

// Get a cell
Cell cell = buffer.cell(x, y);
----

=== Cell

A `Cell` represents a single character with styling:

[source,java]
----
// Create a cell with character and style
Cell cell = Cell.of('X', Style.EMPTY.bold().fg(Color.CYAN));

// Get properties
char symbol = cell.symbol();
Style style = cell.style();
----

=== Frame

A `Frame` wraps a buffer and provides rendering helpers:

[source,java]
----
terminal.draw(frame -> {
    // Get the renderable area
    Rect area = frame.area();

    // Render a widget to the frame
    frame.renderWidget(myWidget, area);

    // Or render to a sub-area
    Rect subArea = new Rect(0, 0, 40, 10);
    frame.renderWidget(headerWidget, subArea);
});
----

== Layout System

=== Rect

A `Rect` defines a rectangular region with position and size:

[source,java]
----
// Create a rectangle
Rect rect = new Rect(x, y, width, height);

// Properties
int x = rect.x();
int y = rect.y();
int width = rect.width();
int height = rect.height();

// Derived values
int right = rect.right();    // x + width
int bottom = rect.bottom();  // y + height
Position center = rect.center();
----

=== Constraints

Constraints define how space is allocated in layouts:

[cols="1,2,2",options="header"]
|===
|Constraint |Description |Example

|`Length(n)`
|Fixed size of n cells
|`Constraint.length(20)`

|`Percentage(n)`
|n% of available space
|`Constraint.percentage(50)`

|`Ratio(num, denom)`
|Fractional size
|`Constraint.ratio(1, 3)`

|`Min(n)`
|At least n cells
|`Constraint.min(10)`

|`Max(n)`
|At most n cells
|`Constraint.max(50)`

|`Fill(weight)`
|Fill remaining space with weight
|`Constraint.fill()` or `Constraint.fill(2)`
|===

=== Layout

A `Layout` divides a rectangular area into smaller areas based on constraints.

The core operation is `split()`: it takes a `Rect` and returns a `List<Rect>` - one for each constraint. You then render widgets into those rectangles.

[source,java]
----
Layout layout = Layout.builder()
    .direction(Direction.VERTICAL)
    .constraints(
        Constraint.length(3),   // First area: 3 cells tall
        Constraint.fill()       // Second area: takes remaining space
    )
    .build();

// Split a 80x24 area into two rectangles
Rect area = new Rect(0, 0, 80, 24);
List<Rect> areas = layout.split(area);

// Result:
// areas.get(0) = Rect(0, 0, 80, 3)   - header area
// areas.get(1) = Rect(0, 3, 80, 21)  - content area
----

Complete example with rendering:

[source,java]
----
// Split vertically into header (3 lines) and content (rest)
Layout layout = Layout.builder()
    .direction(Direction.VERTICAL)
    .constraints(
        Constraint.length(3),
        Constraint.fill()
    )
    .build();

List<Rect> areas = layout.split(frame.area());
Rect headerArea = areas.get(0);
Rect contentArea = areas.get(1);

// Render widgets into the split areas
Paragraph header = new Paragraph("Header Text");
header.render(headerArea, frame.buffer());

Paragraph content = new Paragraph("Main content goes here...");
content.render(contentArea, frame.buffer());
----

Layouts can be nested:

[source,java]
----
// Split horizontally with percentages
Layout horizontalLayout = Layout.builder()
    .direction(Direction.HORIZONTAL)
    .constraints(
        Constraint.percentage(30),
        Constraint.percentage(70)
    )
    .build();

List<Rect> columns = horizontalLayout.split(contentArea);

// Render sidebar and main area
List sidebar = List.builder()
    .items("Item 1", "Item 2", "Item 3")
    .build();
sidebar.render(columns.get(0), frame.buffer());

Paragraph mainArea = new Paragraph("Main content");
mainArea.render(columns.get(1), frame.buffer());
----

==== Flex Positioning

When layout children don't fill the entire container (e.g., fixed-size elements in a large space), you can control how remaining space is distributed using `Flex`:

[source,java]
----
import dev.tamboui.layout.Flex;

// Center three fixed-width buttons in a toolbar
Layout toolbar = Layout.builder()
    .direction(Direction.HORIZONTAL)
    .constraints(
        Constraint.length(10),  // Button 1
        Constraint.length(10),  // Button 2
        Constraint.length(10)   // Button 3
    )
    .flex(Flex.CENTER)  // Center the buttons, space on both sides
    .build();

List<Rect> buttonAreas = toolbar.split(toolbarArea);
renderButton("Save", buttonAreas.get(0), frame.buffer());
renderButton("Cancel", buttonAreas.get(1), frame.buffer());
renderButton("Help", buttonAreas.get(2), frame.buffer());

// Spread menu items across a navigation bar
Layout navbar = Layout.builder()
    .direction(Direction.HORIZONTAL)
    .constraints(
        Constraint.length(8),   // "File"
        Constraint.length(8)    // "Edit"
    )
    .flex(Flex.SPACE_BETWEEN)  // Push to edges with gap between
    .build();

List<Rect> menuAreas = navbar.split(navbarArea);
renderMenuItem("File", menuAreas.get(0), frame.buffer());
renderMenuItem("Edit", menuAreas.get(1), frame.buffer());
----

Available flex modes: `START`, `CENTER`, `END`, `SPACE_BETWEEN`, `SPACE_AROUND`, `SPACE_EVENLY`.

See link:styling.html#flex-layout[Flex Layout] in the CSS Styling guide for detailed documentation including CSS usage and practical examples.

=== Direction

Layouts can split in two directions:

* `Direction.VERTICAL` - stack elements top to bottom
* `Direction.HORIZONTAL` - place elements left to right

=== Margin

Add spacing around layouts:

[source,java]
----
Layout.builder()
    .margin(new Margin(1, 2, 1, 2))  // top, right, bottom, left
    .constraints(...)
    .build()
----

== Styling

=== Style

`Style` is an immutable object that defines text appearance:

[source,java]
----
// Create a style
Style style = Style.EMPTY
    .fg(Color.CYAN)
    .bg(Color.BLACK)
    .bold()
    .underlined();

// Styles are immutable - methods return new instances
Style dimStyle = style.dim();
----

=== Color

Colors can be specified in multiple ways:

[source,java]
----
// Named ANSI colors
Color.RED
Color.GREEN
Color.CYAN
Color.WHITE
Color.GRAY

// Indexed colors (0-255)
Color.indexed(196)

// RGB colors (true color)
Color.rgb(255, 128, 0)
----

=== Modifiers

Text modifiers change how text is displayed:

[source,java]
----
Style.EMPTY
    .bold()       // Bold text
    .dim()        // Dimmed/faint
    .italic()     // Italic (terminal support varies)
    .underlined() // Underlined
    .slowBlink()  // Slow blinking
    .rapidBlink() // Rapid blinking
    .reversed()   // Swap fg/bg colors
    .hidden()     // Hidden text
    .crossedOut() // Strikethrough
----

== Text System

{project-name} provides a hierarchical text model (`Text` > `Line` > `Span`) for styled terminal output.
For a convenient way to create styled text from markup strings, see link:markup.html[Markup Text].

=== Text

`Text` represents multi-line styled text:

[source,java]
----
// Simple text
Text text = Text.from("Hello, World!");

// Multi-line text
Text multiLine = Text.of(
    Line.from("First line"),
    Line.from("Second line")
);

// With alignment
Text centered = Text.from("Centered").centered();
----

=== Line

A `Line` is a single line composed of `Span` objects:

[source,java]
----
Line line = Line.from(
    Span.styled("Bold", Style.EMPTY.bold()),
    Span.raw(" and "),
    Span.styled("Red", Style.EMPTY.fg(Color.RED))
);
----

=== Span

A `Span` is a styled piece of text:

[source,java]
----
// Unstyled span
Span plain = Span.raw("plain text");

// Styled span
Span styled = Span.styled("styled", Style.EMPTY.cyan().bold());
----

== Widget Interfaces

=== Widget (Stateless)

Stateless widgets implement the `Widget` interface:

[source,java]
----
public interface Widget {
    void render(Rect area, Buffer buffer);
}
----

Examples: `Paragraph`, `Gauge`, `Block`, `Clear`

=== StatefulWidget (Stateful)

Stateful widgets carry external state:

[source,java]
----
public interface StatefulWidget<S> {
    void render(Rect area, Buffer buffer, S state);
}
----

The state object tracks selection, scroll position, etc:

[source,java]
----
// Create state
ListState listState = new ListState();

// Render with state
listWidget.render(area, buffer, listState);

// Modify state based on user input
listState.selectNext(items.size());
----

Examples: `ListWidget`, `Table`, `Tabs`, `TextInput`

== Event System

{project-name} supports keyboard, mouse, and tick events:

=== KeyEvent

[source,java]
----
// Check specific keys
if (event.code() == KeyCode.ENTER) { ... }
if (event.code() == KeyCode.CHAR && event.character() == 'q') { ... }

// Check modifiers
if (event.modifiers().contains(KeyModifiers.CTRL)) { ... }

// Using Keys utility
if (event.isQuit()) { ... }
if (event.isUp()) { ... }
----

=== MouseEvent

[source,java]
----
int x = event.x();
int y = event.y();
MouseEventKind kind = event.kind();

if (kind == MouseEventKind.DOWN && event.button() == MouseButton.LEFT) {
    handleClick(x, y);
}
----

=== TickEvent

Tick events fire periodically for animations:

[source,java]
----
// Configure tick rate
TuiConfig config = TuiConfig.builder()
    .tickRate(Duration.ofMillis(16))  // ~60fps
    .build();

// Handle tick
if (event instanceof TickEvent) {
    updateAnimation();
    return true;  // redraw
}
----

=== Exceptions

TamboUI tries to enforce a clear, consistent exception hierarchy for framework errors.

* All framework exceptions extend `TamboUIException` (`dev.tamboui.error.TamboUIException`). This is a `RuntimeException`.
* Terminal I/O errors are wrapped in `RuntimeIOException` (`dev.tamboui.error.RuntimeIOException`), to avoid having to catch `IOException` which often are non-recoverable.
* Backend (non-I/O) errors use `BackendException` (`dev.tamboui.terminal.BackendException`).
* TUI framework errors use `TuiException` (`dev.tamboui.tui.TuiException`).
* For invalid parameters or state, Java standard exceptions such as `IllegalArgumentException` or `IllegalStateException` are used.
* Domain-specific exception types (e.g., `SolverException` for layout, `CssParseException` for CSS parsing) are used where possible.

TamboUI's `TuiRunner` also provides centralized error handling: all exceptions during rendering and event handling are passed to a configurable `RenderErrorHandler`. The default behavior displays errors (with stack traces) in the UI for easier debugging.

== Next Steps

* Explore the link:widgets.html[Widgets Reference] for available components
* Learn about link:api-levels.html[API Levels] in detail
* Use link:styling.html[CSS Styling] for external style definitions
* Understand link:bindings.html[Bindings and Actions] for input handling
* Build maintainable apps with link:mvc-architecture.html[Application Structure]

Commit message:

Reorganize docs
This commit reorganizes docs and fixes several errors, terminology
problems and missing widgets which were due to inconsistent/fast
evolution of the API. The docs now make it clearer what is widget,
what is toolkit, etc.

docs/src/docs/asciidoc/core-concepts.adoc, after:

= Core Concepts
:doctype: book
:icons: font
:source-highlighter: highlight.js
:toc: left
:toclevels: 3

include::_attributes.adoc[]

{project-name}'s architecture follows https://ratatui.rs[ratatui] closely.
If you've used ratatui before, the concepts here will be familiar - `Buffer`, `Cell`, `Frame`, `Widget`, `Layout` all work the same way.

== Rendering Model

{project-name} uses *immediate-mode rendering* with an *intermediate buffer system*:

1. **Widgets render to a Buffer** - not directly to the terminal
2. **Buffer is diffed** - only changed cells are sent to the terminal
3. **Each frame is a full redraw** - simple state management, no retained state in widgets

[source]
----
Application State
       │
       ▼
┌─────────────┐      ┌─────────────┐      ┌─────────────┐
│   Widgets   │ ───▶ │   Buffer    │ ───▶ │  Terminal   │
│   render()  │      │  (diff)     │      │  (output)   │
└─────────────┘      └─────────────┘      └─────────────┘
----

This model makes {project-name} applications easy to reason about: the UI is always a pure function of your application state.

== Buffer System

[TIP]
If you're using the Toolkit DSL, you won't interact with buffers directly. Feel free to skip this section.

=== Buffer

A `Buffer` is a 2D grid of `Cell` objects representing the terminal screen:

[source,java]
----
// A Buffer is created for each frame
Buffer buffer = new Buffer(width, height);

// Set a cell at position (x, y)
buffer.setCell(x, y, Cell.of('A', Style.EMPTY.fg(Color.RED)));

// Get a cell
Cell cell = buffer.cell(x, y);
----

=== Cell

A `Cell` represents a single character with styling:

[source,java]
----
// Create a cell with character and style
Cell cell = Cell.of('X', Style.EMPTY.bold().fg(Color.CYAN));

// Get properties
char symbol = cell.symbol();
Style style = cell.style();
----

=== Frame

A `Frame` wraps a buffer and provides rendering helpers:

[source,java]
----
terminal.draw(frame -> {
    // Get the renderable area
    Rect area = frame.area();

    // Render a widget to the frame
    frame.renderWidget(myWidget, area);

    // Or render to a sub-area
    Rect subArea = new Rect(0, 0, 40, 10);
    frame.renderWidget(headerWidget, subArea);
});
----

== Layout System

=== Rect

A `Rect` defines a rectangular region with position and size:

[source,java]
----
// Create a rectangle
Rect rect = new Rect(x, y, width, height);

// Properties
int x = rect.x();
int y = rect.y();
int width = rect.width();
int height = rect.height();

// Derived values
int right = rect.right();    // x + width
int bottom = rect.bottom();  // y + height
Position center = rect.center();
----

=== Constraints

Constraints define how space is allocated in layouts:

[cols="1,2,2",options="header"]
|===
|Constraint |Description |Example

|`Length(n)`
|Fixed size of n cells
|`Constraint.length(20)`

|`Percentage(n)`
|n% of available space
|`Constraint.percentage(50)`

|`Ratio(num, denom)`
|Fractional size
|`Constraint.ratio(1, 3)`

|`Min(n)`
|At least n cells
|`Constraint.min(10)`

|`Max(n)`
|At most n cells
|`Constraint.max(50)`

|`Fill(weight)`
|Fill remaining space with weight
|`Constraint.fill()` or `Constraint.fill(2)`
|===

=== Layout

A `Layout` divides a rectangular area into smaller areas based on constraints.

The core operation is `split()`: it takes a `Rect` and returns a `List<Rect>` - one for each constraint. You then render widgets into those rectangles.

[source,java]
----
Layout layout = Layout.builder()
    .direction(Direction.VERTICAL)
    .constraints(
        Constraint.length(3),   // First area: 3 cells tall
        Constraint.fill()       // Second area: takes remaining space
    )
    .build();

// Split a 80x24 area into two rectangles
Rect area = new Rect(0, 0, 80, 24);
List<Rect> areas = layout.split(area);

// Result:
// areas.get(0) = Rect(0, 0, 80, 3)   - header area
// areas.get(1) = Rect(0, 3, 80, 21)  - content area
----

Complete example with rendering:

[source,java]
----
// Split vertically into header (3 lines) and content (rest)
Layout layout = Layout.builder()
    .direction(Direction.VERTICAL)
    .constraints(
        Constraint.length(3),
        Constraint.fill()
    )
    .build();

List<Rect> areas = layout.split(frame.area());
Rect headerArea = areas.get(0);
Rect contentArea = areas.get(1);

// Render widgets into the split areas
Paragraph header = new Paragraph("Header Text");
header.render(headerArea, frame.buffer());

Paragraph content = new Paragraph("Main content goes here...");
content.render(contentArea, frame.buffer());
----

Layouts can be nested:

[source,java]
----
// Split horizontally with percentages
Layout horizontalLayout = Layout.builder()
    .direction(Direction.HORIZONTAL)
    .constraints(
        Constraint.percentage(30),
        Constraint.percentage(70)
    )
    .build();

List<Rect> columns = horizontalLayout.split(contentArea);

// Render sidebar and main area
List sidebar = List.builder()
    .items("Item 1", "Item 2", "Item 3")
    .build();
sidebar.render(columns.get(0), frame.buffer());

Paragraph mainArea = new Paragraph("Main content");
mainArea.render(columns.get(1), frame.buffer());
----

==== Flex Positioning

When layout children don't fill the entire container (e.g., fixed-size elements in a large space), you can control how remaining space is distributed using `Flex`:

[source,java]
----
import dev.tamboui.layout.Flex;

// Center three fixed-width buttons in a toolbar
Layout toolbar = Layout.builder()
    .direction(Direction.HORIZONTAL)
    .constraints(
        Constraint.length(10),  // Button 1
        Constraint.length(10),  // Button 2
        Constraint.length(10)   // Button 3
    )
    .flex(Flex.CENTER)  // Center the buttons, space on both sides
    .build();

List<Rect> buttonAreas = toolbar.split(toolbarArea);
renderButton("Save", buttonAreas.get(0), frame.buffer());
renderButton("Cancel", buttonAreas.get(1), frame.buffer());
renderButton("Help", buttonAreas.get(2), frame.buffer());

// Spread menu items across a navigation bar
Layout navbar = Layout.builder()
    .direction(Direction.HORIZONTAL)
    .constraints(
        Constraint.length(8),   // "File"
        Constraint.length(8)    // "Edit"
    )
    .flex(Flex.SPACE_BETWEEN)  // Push to edges with gap between
    .build();

List<Rect> menuAreas = navbar.split(navbarArea);
renderMenuItem("File", menuAreas.get(0), frame.buffer());
renderMenuItem("Edit", menuAreas.get(1), frame.buffer());
----

Available flex modes: `START`, `CENTER`, `END`, `SPACE_BETWEEN`, `SPACE_AROUND`, `SPACE_EVENLY`.

See link:styling.html#flex-layout[Flex Layout] in the CSS Styling guide for detailed documentation including CSS usage and practical examples.

=== Direction

Layouts can split in two directions:

* `Direction.VERTICAL` - stack elements top to bottom
* `Direction.HORIZONTAL` - place elements left to right

=== Margin

Add spacing around layouts:

[source,java]
----
Layout.builder()
    .margin(new Margin(1, 2, 1, 2))  // top, right, bottom, left
    .constraints(...)
    .build()
----

== Styling

=== Style

`Style` is an immutable object that defines text appearance:

[source,java]
----
// Create a style
Style style = Style.EMPTY
    .fg(Color.CYAN)
    .bg(Color.BLACK)
    .bold()
    .underlined();

// Styles are immutable - methods return new instances
Style dimStyle = style.dim();
----

=== Color

Colors can be specified in multiple ways:

[source,java]
----
// Named ANSI colors
Color.RED
Color.GREEN
Color.CYAN
Color.WHITE
Color.GRAY

// Indexed colors (0-255)
Color.indexed(196)

// RGB colors (true color)
Color.rgb(255, 128, 0)
----

=== Modifiers

Text modifiers change how text is displayed:

[source,java]
----
Style.EMPTY
    .bold()       // Bold text
    .dim()        // Dimmed/faint
    .italic()     // Italic (terminal support varies)
    .underlined() // Underlined
    .slowBlink()  // Slow blinking
    .rapidBlink() // Rapid blinking
    .reversed()   // Swap fg/bg colors
    .hidden()     // Hidden text
    .crossedOut() // Strikethrough
----

== Text System

{project-name} provides a hierarchical text model (`Text` > `Line` > `Span`) for styled terminal output.
For a convenient way to create styled text from markup strings, see link:markup.html[Markup Text].

=== Text

`Text` represents multi-line styled text:

[source,java]
----
// Simple text
Text text = Text.from("Hello, World!");

// Multi-line text
Text multiLine = Text.of(
    Line.from("First line"),
    Line.from("Second line")
);

// With alignment
Text centered = Text.from("Centered").centered();
----

=== Line

A `Line` is a single line composed of `Span` objects:

[source,java]
----
Line line = Line.from(
    Span.styled("Bold", Style.EMPTY.bold()),
    Span.raw(" and "),
    Span.styled("Red", Style.EMPTY.fg(Color.RED))
);
----

=== Span

A `Span` is a styled piece of text:

[source,java]
----
// Unstyled span
Span plain = Span.raw("plain text");

// Styled span
Span styled = Span.styled("styled", Style.EMPTY.cyan().bold());
----

== Widget Interfaces

=== Widget (Stateless)

Stateless widgets implement the `Widget` interface:

[source,java]
----
public interface Widget {
    void render(Rect area, Buffer buffer);
}
----

Examples: `Paragraph`, `Gauge`, `Block`, `Clear`

=== StatefulWidget (Stateful)

Stateful widgets carry external state:

[source,java]
----
public interface StatefulWidget<S> {
    void render(Rect area, Buffer buffer, S state);
}
----

The state object tracks selection, scroll position, etc:

[source,java]
----
// Create state
ListState listState = new ListState();

// Render with state
listWidget.render(area, buffer, listState);

// Modify state based on user input
listState.selectNext(items.size());
----

Examples: `ListWidget`, `Table`, `Tabs`, `TextInput`

== Event System

{project-name} supports keyboard, mouse, and tick events:

=== KeyEvent

[source,java]
----
// Check specific keys
if (event.code() == KeyCode.ENTER) { ... }
if (event.code() == KeyCode.CHAR && event.character() == 'q') { ... }

// Check modifiers
if (event.modifiers().contains(KeyModifiers.CTRL)) { ... }

// Using Keys utility
if (event.isQuit()) { ... }
if (event.isUp()) { ... }
----

=== MouseEvent

[source,java]
----
int x = event.x();
int y = event.y();
MouseEventKind kind = event.kind();

if (kind == MouseEventKind.DOWN && event.button() == MouseButton.LEFT) {
    handleClick(x, y);
}
----

=== TickEvent

Tick events fire periodically for animations:

[source,java]
----
// Configure tick rate
TuiConfig config = TuiConfig.builder()
    .tickRate(Duration.ofMillis(16))  // ~60fps
    .build();

// Handle tick
if (event instanceof TickEvent) {
    updateAnimation();
    return true;  // redraw
}
----

=== Exceptions

TamboUI tries to enforce a clear, consistent exception hierarchy for framework errors.

* All framework exceptions extend `TamboUIException` (`dev.tamboui.error.TamboUIException`). This is a `RuntimeException`.
* Terminal I/O errors are wrapped in `RuntimeIOException` (`dev.tamboui.error.RuntimeIOException`), to avoid having to catch `IOException` which often are non-recoverable.
* Backend (non-I/O) errors use `BackendException` (`dev.tamboui.terminal.BackendException`).
* TUI framework errors use `TuiException` (`dev.tamboui.tui.TuiException`).
* For invalid parameters or state, Java standard exceptions such as `IllegalArgumentException` or `IllegalStateException` are used.
* Domain-specific exception types (e.g., `SolverException` for layout, `CssParseException` for CSS parsing) are used where possible.

TamboUI's `TuiRunner` also provides centralized error handling: all exceptions during rendering and event handling are passed to a configurable `RenderErrorHandler`. The default behavior displays errors (with stack traces) in the UI for easier debugging.

== Next Steps

* Explore the link:widgets.html[Widgets Reference] for available components
* Learn about link:api-levels.html[API Levels] in detail
* Use link:styling.html[CSS Styling] for external style definitions
* Understand link:bindings.html[Bindings and Actions] for input handling
* Build maintainable apps with link:mvc-architecture.html[Application Structure]
