docs/src/docs/asciidoc/index.adoc, before:

= TamboUI Documentation
:doctype: book
:icons: font
:source-highlighter: highlight.js
:toc: left
:toclevels: 3

include::_attributes.adoc[]

== Introduction

{project-name} is a Java library for building terminal user interfaces.
The design follows Rust's {ratatui-url}[ratatui] closely - same rendering model, similar widget APIs, familiar layout system.
If you know ratatui, you'll pick this up quickly.

[NOTE]
====
{project-name} is still experimental and under active development. APIs may change.
Feedback, issues, and contributions are welcome!
====

=== Key Features

* *Immediate-mode rendering* - Redraw the entire UI each frame for simple state management
* *Intermediate buffer system* - Widgets render to a buffer, enabling diff-based terminal updates
* *Constraint-based layout* - Flexible layout system with percentage, fixed, ratio, and proportional sizing
* *JLine 3 backend* - Cross-platform terminal support including Windows via Jansi
* *High-level TUI framework* - TuiRunner eliminates boilerplate with built-in event handling
* *Declarative Toolkit DSL* - Fluent API for building UIs with components and focus management
* *PicoCLI integration* - Optional module for CLI argument parsing
* *GraalVM native image support* - Compile to native executables for instant startup

=== Module Overview

[cols="1,3",options="header"]
|===
|Module |Description

|`{core-module}`
|Core types: Buffer, Cell, Rect, Style, Layout, Text primitives

|`{widgets-module}`
|All widget implementations (Block, Paragraph, List, Table, Chart, etc.)

|`{jline-module}`
|JLine 3 terminal backend for cross-platform support

|`{tui-module}`
|High-level TUI framework with TuiRunner, event handling, bindings, and key helpers

|`{toolkit-module}`
|Fluent DSL for declarative UI construction with components and focus management

|`{css-module}`
|CSS-based styling with TCSS format, selectors, and theme switching

|`{annotations-module}`
|Annotation definitions (`@OnAction`) for action handling

|`{processor-module}`
|Annotation processor for compile-time action handler generation

|`tamboui-image`
|Image rendering with Kitty, iTerm, Sixel, and braille protocols

|`tamboui-picocli`
|Optional PicoCLI integration for CLI argument parsing
|===

== Documentation Sections

=== link:getting-started.html[Getting Started]
Installation, hello world examples, and running demos.

=== link:core-concepts.html[Core Concepts]
Understanding the rendering model, buffer system, layout, and styling.

=== link:widgets.html[Widgets Reference]
Comprehensive guide to all available widgets with examples.

=== link:api-levels.html[API Levels]
Detailed documentation for immediate mode, TuiRunner, Toolkit DSL, and inline display.

=== link:styling.html[CSS Styling]
External stylesheets with TCSS format, selectors, and runtime theme switching.

=== link:bindings.html[Bindings and Actions]
Key and mouse bindings, action handlers, and the `@OnAction` annotation.

=== link:mvc-architecture.html[Application Structure]
Architecture patterns for building maintainable TUI applications.

=== link:developer-guide.html[Developer Guide]
Creating custom widgets and components.

== Quick Example

Here's a minimal example using the Toolkit DSL:

[source,java]
----
import static dev.tamboui.toolkit.Toolkit.*;
import dev.tamboui.toolkit.app.ToolkitApp;
import dev.tamboui.toolkit.element.Element;

public class HelloTamboUI extends ToolkitApp {

    @Override
    protected Element render() {
        return panel("Hello",
            text("Welcome to TamboUI!").bold().cyan(),
            spacer(),
            text("Press 'q' to quit").dim()
        ).rounded();
    }

    public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception {
        new HelloTamboUI().run();
    }
}
----

== Resources

* {github-url}[GitHub Repository]
* {github-url}/issues[Issue Tracker]
* https://tamboui.zulipchat.com[Zulip Chat]

== License

{project-name} is released under the MIT License.

Commit message:

Align bbcode features with expectations

docs/src/docs/asciidoc/index.adoc, after:

= TamboUI Documentation
:doctype: book
:icons: font
:source-highlighter: highlight.js
:toc: left
:toclevels: 3

include::_attributes.adoc[]

== Introduction

{project-name} is a Java library for building terminal user interfaces.
The design follows Rust's {ratatui-url}[ratatui] closely - same rendering model, similar widget APIs, familiar layout system.
If you know ratatui, you'll pick this up quickly.

[NOTE]
====
{project-name} is still experimental and under active development. APIs may change.
Feedback, issues, and contributions are welcome!
====

=== Key Features

* *Immediate-mode rendering* - Redraw the entire UI each frame for simple state management
* *Intermediate buffer system* - Widgets render to a buffer, enabling diff-based terminal updates
* *Constraint-based layout* - Flexible layout system with percentage, fixed, ratio, and proportional sizing
* *JLine 3 backend* - Cross-platform terminal support including Windows via Jansi
* *High-level TUI framework* - TuiRunner eliminates boilerplate with built-in event handling
* *Declarative Toolkit DSL* - Fluent API for building UIs with components and focus management
* *PicoCLI integration* - Optional module for CLI argument parsing
* *GraalVM native image support* - Compile to native executables for instant startup

=== Module Overview

[cols="1,3",options="header"]
|===
|Module |Description

|`{core-module}`
|Core types: Buffer, Cell, Rect, Style, Layout, Text primitives

|`{widgets-module}`
|All widget implementations (Block, Paragraph, List, Table, Chart, etc.)

|`{jline-module}`
|JLine 3 terminal backend for cross-platform support

|`{tui-module}`
|High-level TUI framework with TuiRunner, event handling, bindings, and key helpers

|`{toolkit-module}`
|Fluent DSL for declarative UI construction with components and focus management

|`{css-module}`
|CSS-based styling with TCSS format, selectors, and theme switching

|`{annotations-module}`
|Annotation definitions (`@OnAction`) for action handling

|`{processor-module}`
|Annotation processor for compile-time action handler generation

|`tamboui-image`
|Image rendering with Kitty, iTerm, Sixel, and braille protocols

|`tamboui-picocli`
|Optional PicoCLI integration for CLI argument parsing
|===

== Documentation Sections

=== link:getting-started.html[Getting Started]
Installation, hello world examples, and running demos.

=== link:core-concepts.html[Core Concepts]
Understanding the rendering model, buffer system, layout, and styling.

=== link:markup.html[Markup Text]
BBCode-style markup for creating styled text with colors, modifiers, and custom tags.

=== link:widgets.html[Widgets Reference]
Comprehensive guide to all available widgets with examples.

=== link:api-levels.html[API Levels]
Detailed documentation for immediate mode, TuiRunner, Toolkit DSL, and inline display.

=== link:styling.html[CSS Styling]
External stylesheets with TCSS format, selectors, and runtime theme switching.

=== link:bindings.html[Bindings and Actions]
Key and mouse bindings, action handlers, and the `@OnAction` annotation.

=== link:mvc-architecture.html[Application Structure]
Architecture patterns for building maintainable TUI applications.

=== link:developer-guide.html[Developer Guide]
Creating custom widgets and components.

== Quick Example

Here's a minimal example using the Toolkit DSL:

[source,java]
----
import static dev.tamboui.toolkit.Toolkit.*;
import dev.tamboui.toolkit.app.ToolkitApp;
import dev.tamboui.toolkit.element.Element;

public class HelloTamboUI extends ToolkitApp {

    @Override
    protected Element render() {
        return panel("Hello",
            text("Welcome to TamboUI!").bold().cyan(),
            spacer(),
            text("Press 'q' to quit").dim()
        ).rounded();
    }

    public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception {
        new HelloTamboUI().run();
    }
}
----

== Resources

* {github-url}[GitHub Repository]
* {github-url}/issues[Issue Tracker]
* https://tamboui.zulipchat.com[Zulip Chat]

== License

{project-name} is released under the MIT License.
