docs/src/docs/asciidoc/mvc-architecture.adoc, before:

= Application Structure
:doctype: book
:icons: font
:source-highlighter: highlight.js
:toc: left
:toclevels: 3

include::_attributes.adoc[]

This guide explains how to build maintainable terminal applications using the Model-View-Controller (MVC) pattern with {project-name}.

== Architecture Overview

The recommended architecture separates concerns into three layers:

[source]
----
┌─────────────┐     reads      ┌─────────────┐
│  Controller │ ◄──────────────│    View     │
│   (State)   │                │  (Element)  │
└─────────────┘                └─────────────┘
       ▲                              │
       │         dispatches           │
       └──────────────────────────────┘
                 events
----

* **Controller**: Holds all application state and provides methods to modify it
* **View**: A pure function that reads state from the controller and returns an `Element`
* **Events**: Dispatched to the controller, which updates state

== The Controller

The controller is a plain Java class that encapsulates your application state:

[source,java]
----
import dev.tamboui.widgets.input.TextInputState;

public class TodoController {
    private final List<TodoItem> items = new ArrayList<>();
    private final TextInputState inputState = new TextInputState();
    private int selectedIndex = 0;
    private boolean inputMode = false;

    public record TodoItem(String text, boolean done) {}

    // Queries (read state)
    public List<TodoItem> items() { return List.copyOf(items); }
    public int selectedIndex() { return selectedIndex; }
    public TextInputState inputState() { return inputState; }
    public boolean isInputMode() { return inputMode; }

    // Commands (modify state)
    public void moveUp() {
        if (selectedIndex > 0) selectedIndex--;
    }

    public void moveDown() {
        if (selectedIndex < items.size() - 1) {
            selectedIndex++;
        }
    }

    public void toggleSelected() {
        if (!items.isEmpty()) {
            var item = items.get(selectedIndex);
            items.set(selectedIndex, new TodoItem(item.text(), !item.done()));
        }
    }

    public void deleteSelected() {
        if (!items.isEmpty()) {
            items.remove(selectedIndex);
            if (selectedIndex >= items.size() && selectedIndex > 0) {
                selectedIndex--;
            }
        }
    }

    public void startInput() { inputMode = true; }
    public void cancelInput() { inputMode = false; inputState.clear(); }

    public void submitInput() {
        if (inputState.length() > 0) {
            items.add(new TodoItem(inputState.text(), false));
            selectedIndex = items.size() - 1;
        }
        inputMode = false;
        inputState.clear();
    }
}
----

=== Controller Design Principles

* **Queries** are pure read-only methods that return state
* **Commands** modify state and have no return value
* Return defensive copies of collections (`List.copyOf()`)
* Keep state private, expose through methods

== The View

The view is a pure function that transforms controller state into UI elements:

[source,java]
----
import static dev.tamboui.toolkit.Toolkit.*;

public class TodoView {
    private final TodoController controller;

    public TodoView(TodoController controller) {
        this.controller = controller;
    }

    public Element render() {
        return panel("Todo List",
            renderList(),
            spacer(),
            renderInput(),
            renderHelp()
        ).rounded().id("main").focusable();
    }

    private Element renderList() {
        var items = controller.items();
        if (items.isEmpty()) {
            return text("No items. Press 'a' to add one.").dim().italic();
        }

        var elements = new Element[items.size()];
        for (int i = 0; i < items.size(); i++) {
            elements[i] = renderItem(i, items.get(i));
        }
        return column(elements);
    }

    private Element renderItem(int index, TodoController.TodoItem item) {
        var checkbox = item.done() ? "[x]" : "[ ]";
        var element = text(checkbox + " " + item.text());

        if (index == controller.selectedIndex()) {
            element = element.reversed();
        }
        if (item.done()) {
            element = element.dim().crossedOut();
        }
        return element;
    }

    private Element renderInput() {
        if (!controller.isInputMode()) {
            return text("");
        }
        return row(
            text("New: ").cyan(),
            textInput(controller.inputState()).fill()
        );
    }

    private Element renderHelp() {
        if (controller.isInputMode()) {
            return text("[Enter] Save  [Esc] Cancel").dim();
        }
        return text("[a] Add  [Space] Toggle  [d] Delete  [j/k] Navigate  [q] Quit").dim();
    }
}
----

=== View Design Principles

* Views are **pure functions**: `Controller → Element`
* No side effects in render methods
* All state comes from the controller
* Conditional rendering based on controller state

== Event Handling

=== Using Lambda Handlers

For simple applications, attach handlers directly:

[source,java]
----
import static dev.tamboui.toolkit.Toolkit.handleTextInputKey;

public class TodoApp {
    public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception {
        var controller = new TodoController();
        var view = new TodoView(controller);

        try (var runner = ToolkitRunner.create()) {
            runner.run(() ->
                view.render()
                    .onKeyEvent(event -> handleEvent(event, controller))
            );
        }
    }

    private static EventResult handleEvent(KeyEvent event, TodoController ctrl) {
        if (ctrl.isInputMode()) {
            return handleInputMode(event, ctrl);
        }
        return handleNormalMode(event, ctrl);
    }

    private static EventResult handleInputMode(KeyEvent event, TodoController ctrl) {
        if (event.isCancel()) {
            ctrl.cancelInput();
            return EventResult.HANDLED;
        }
        if (event.isSelect()) {
            ctrl.submitInput();
            return EventResult.HANDLED;
        }
        if (handleTextInputKey(ctrl.inputState(), event)) {
            return EventResult.HANDLED;
        }
        return EventResult.UNHANDLED;
    }

    private static EventResult handleNormalMode(KeyEvent event, TodoController ctrl) {
        if (event.isChar('a')) { ctrl.startInput(); return EventResult.HANDLED; }
        if (event.isUp()) { ctrl.moveUp(); return EventResult.HANDLED; }
        if (event.isDown()) { ctrl.moveDown(); return EventResult.HANDLED; }
        if (event.isSelect()) { ctrl.toggleSelected(); return EventResult.HANDLED; }
        if (event.isChar('d')) { ctrl.deleteSelected(); return EventResult.HANDLED; }
        return EventResult.UNHANDLED;
    }
}
----

=== Separate Key Handler Class

For complex applications, extract event handling:

[source,java]
----
public class TodoKeyHandler {
    private final TodoController controller;

    public TodoKeyHandler(TodoController controller) {
        this.controller = controller;
    }

    public EventResult handle(KeyEvent event) {
        if (controller.isInputMode()) {
            return handleInputMode(event);
        }
        return handleNormalMode(event);
    }

    private EventResult handleInputMode(KeyEvent event) {
        if (event.isCancel()) {
            controller.cancelInput();
            return EventResult.HANDLED;
        }
        if (event.isConfirm()) {
            controller.submitInput();
            return EventResult.HANDLED;
        }
        // ... handle text input
        return EventResult.UNHANDLED;
    }

    private EventResult handleNormalMode(KeyEvent event) {
        if (event.isChar('a')) {
            controller.startInput();
            return EventResult.HANDLED;
        }
        // ... more handlers
        return EventResult.UNHANDLED;
    }
}
----

=== Event Result

Return values control event propagation:

* `EventResult.HANDLED` - Event was processed, stop propagation
* `EventResult.UNHANDLED` - Event was not processed, continue routing

== Focus Management

=== Making Elements Focusable

Both `id()` AND `focusable()` are required:

[source,java]
----
panel("Panel A")
    .id("panel-a")          // Unique identifier (REQUIRED)
    .focusable()            // Enable focus (REQUIRED)
    .borderColor(Color.GRAY)
    .focusedBorderColor(Color.CYAN)  // Visual feedback
----

=== Focus Navigation

[cols="1,2",options="header"]
|===
|Key |Action

|Tab
|Focus next element

|Shift+Tab
|Focus previous element

|Mouse click
|Focus clicked element

|ESC
|Clear focus (if no element handles it)
|===

=== Multi-Panel Applications

[source,java]
----
column(
    panel("Settings")
        .id("settings")
        .focusable()
        .onKeyEvent(event -> handleSettingsKey(event, controller)),

    panel("Actions")
        .id("actions")
        .focusable()
        .onKeyEvent(event -> handleActionsKey(event, controller))
)
----

== Dialogs and Overlays

=== The Dialog Element

[source,java]
----
var inputDialog = dialog("New Directory",
    text("Enter name:"),
    textInput(inputState),
    text("[Enter] Confirm  [Esc] Cancel").dim()
).rounded()
 .borderColor(Color.CYAN)
 .width(50)
 .onConfirm(() -> createDirectory(inputState.text()))
 .onCancel(() -> dismissDialog());
----

=== Implementing Custom Overlay

For custom dialogs, implement `Element` directly:

[source,java]
----
public class MyView implements Element {
    private final MyController controller;

    @Override
    public void render(Frame frame, Rect area, RenderContext context) {
        // 1. Render main UI
        var ui = column(header(), content(), footer());
        ui.render(frame, area, context);

        // 2. Render dialog on top (if present)
        if (controller.hasDialog()) {
            renderDialog(frame, area, context);
        }
    }

    private void renderDialog(Frame frame, Rect area, RenderContext context) {
        int dialogWidth = 50;
        int dialogHeight = 6;
        int x = (area.width() - dialogWidth) / 2;
        int y = (area.height() - dialogHeight) / 2;
        var dialogArea = new Rect(area.x() + x, area.y() + y, dialogWidth, dialogHeight);

        // Clear area first
        frame.renderWidget(Clear.INSTANCE, dialogArea);

        // Render dialog panel
        var dialog = panel("Confirm",
            text(controller.dialogMessage()),
            text("[y] Yes  [n] No  [Esc] Cancel").dim()
        ).rounded().borderColor(Color.YELLOW);

        dialog.render(frame, dialogArea, context);
    }

    @Override
    public EventResult handleKeyEvent(KeyEvent event, boolean focused) {
        // ESC should dismiss dialog, not clear focus
        if (event.isCancel() && controller.hasDialog()) {
            controller.dismissDialog();
            return EventResult.HANDLED;
        }
        // ... other handling
        return EventResult.UNHANDLED;
    }
}
----

== Complete Example

[source,java]
----
import dev.tamboui.toolkit.app.ToolkitRunner;
import dev.tamboui.toolkit.element.Element;
import dev.tamboui.toolkit.event.EventResult;
import dev.tamboui.style.Color;
import dev.tamboui.tui.TuiConfig;
import dev.tamboui.tui.event.KeyCode;
import dev.tamboui.tui.event.KeyEvent;

import java.util.ArrayList;
import java.util.List;

import static dev.tamboui.toolkit.Toolkit.*;

public class TodoApp {

    // ═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════
    // CONTROLLER
    // ═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

    static class Controller {
        public record Item(String text, boolean done) {}

        private final List<Item> items = new ArrayList<>();
        private final StringBuilder input = new StringBuilder();
        private int cursor = 0;
        private boolean editing = false;

        public List<Item> items() { return List.copyOf(items); }
        public int cursor() { return cursor; }
        public String input() { return input.toString(); }
        public boolean isEditing() { return editing; }
        public boolean isEmpty() { return items.isEmpty(); }

        public void cursorUp() { if (cursor > 0) cursor--; }
        public void cursorDown() { if (cursor < items.size() - 1) cursor++; }

        public void toggle() {
            if (!items.isEmpty()) {
                var item = items.get(cursor);
                items.set(cursor, new Item(item.text(), !item.done()));
            }
        }

        public void delete() {
            if (!items.isEmpty()) {
                items.remove(cursor);
                if (cursor >= items.size() && cursor > 0) cursor--;
            }
        }

        public void startEditing() { editing = true; }
        public void cancelEditing() { editing = false; input.setLength(0); }
        public void typeChar(char c) { input.append(c); }
        public void backspace() {
            if (input.length() > 0) input.setLength(input.length() - 1);
        }

        public void submit() {
            if (input.length() > 0) {
                items.add(new Item(input.toString(), false));
                cursor = items.size() - 1;
            }
            editing = false;
            input.setLength(0);
        }
    }

    // ═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════
    // VIEW
    // ═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

    static class View {
        private final Controller ctrl;

        View(Controller ctrl) { this.ctrl = ctrl; }

        Element render() {
            return panel("Todo List",
                ctrl.isEmpty() ? emptyState() : itemList(),
                spacer(),
                inputArea(),
                helpBar()
            ).rounded().borderColor(Color.DARK_GRAY)
             .focusedBorderColor(Color.CYAN)
             .id("main").focusable();
        }

        private Element emptyState() {
            return text("No items yet. Press 'a' to add one.").dim().italic();
        }

        private Element itemList() {
            var items = ctrl.items();
            var elements = new Element[items.size()];
            for (int i = 0; i < items.size(); i++) {
                elements[i] = itemRow(i, items.get(i));
            }
            return column(elements);
        }

        private Element itemRow(int index, Controller.Item item) {
            var prefix = item.done() ? "[x] " : "[ ] ";
            var elem = text(prefix + item.text());

            if (index == ctrl.cursor()) elem = elem.reversed();
            if (item.done()) elem = elem.dim().crossedOut();

            return elem;
        }

        private Element inputArea() {
            if (!ctrl.isEditing()) return text("");
            return row(
                text("New: ").cyan(),
                text(ctrl.input() + "_").bold()
            );
        }

        private Element helpBar() {
            var help = ctrl.isEditing()
                ? "[Enter] Save  [Esc] Cancel"
                : "[a] Add  [Space] Toggle  [d] Delete  [j/k] Move  [q] Quit";
            return text(help).dim();
        }
    }

    // ═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════
    // EVENT HANDLER
    // ═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

    static EventResult handleKey(KeyEvent event, Controller ctrl) {
        if (ctrl.isEditing()) {
            if (event.isCancel()) { ctrl.cancelEditing(); return EventResult.HANDLED; }
            if (event.isSelect()) { ctrl.submit(); return EventResult.HANDLED; }
            if (event.code() == KeyCode.CHAR && event.character() >= 32) {
                ctrl.typeChar(event.character());
                return EventResult.HANDLED;
            }
            if (event.code() == KeyCode.BACKSPACE) {
                ctrl.backspace();
                return EventResult.HANDLED;
            }
            return EventResult.UNHANDLED;
        }

        if (event.isChar('a')) { ctrl.startEditing(); return EventResult.HANDLED; }
        if (event.isUp()) { ctrl.cursorUp(); return EventResult.HANDLED; }
        if (event.isDown()) { ctrl.cursorDown(); return EventResult.HANDLED; }
        if (event.isSelect()) { ctrl.toggle(); return EventResult.HANDLED; }
        if (event.isChar('d')) { ctrl.delete(); return EventResult.HANDLED; }
        return EventResult.UNHANDLED;
    }

    // ═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════
    // MAIN
    // ═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

    public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception {
        var controller = new Controller();
        var view = new View(controller);

        // Add sample data
        controller.items.add(new Controller.Item("Learn TamboUI", false));
        controller.items.add(new Controller.Item("Build awesome apps", false));

        try (var runner = ToolkitRunner.create()) {
            runner.run(() ->
                view.render()
                    .onKeyEvent(e -> handleKey(e, controller))
            );
        }
    }
}
----

== Benefits of This Architecture

[cols="1,3",options="header"]
|===
|Benefit |Description

|Testable
|Controller can be unit tested without any UI

|Reusable
|Same controller can power different views

|Predictable
|State changes only through controller methods

|Debuggable
|Easy to log/inspect state transitions

|Maintainable
|Clear separation of concerns
|===

== Next Steps

* Explore the link:widgets.html[Widgets Reference] for available components
* Learn about link:bindings.html[Bindings and Actions] for handling user input
* Read the link:developer-guide.html[Developer Guide] for creating custom widgets
* See the link:api-levels.html[API Levels] for alternative approaches

Commit message:

Reorganize docs
This commit reorganizes docs and fixes several errors, terminology
problems and missing widgets which were due to inconsistent/fast
evolution of the API. The docs now make it clearer what is widget,
what is toolkit, etc.

docs/src/docs/asciidoc/mvc-architecture.adoc, after:

= Application Structure
:doctype: book
:icons: font
:source-highlighter: highlight.js
:toc: left
:toclevels: 3

include::_attributes.adoc[]

[NOTE]
The examples in this guide use the Toolkit DSL.
See link:api-levels.html#toolkit-dsl[Toolkit DSL] for an introduction.

This guide explains how to build maintainable terminal applications using the Model-View-Controller (MVC) pattern with {project-name}.

== Architecture Overview

The recommended architecture separates concerns into three layers:

[source]
----
┌─────────────┐     reads      ┌─────────────┐
│  Controller │ ◄──────────────│    View     │
│   (State)   │                │  (Element)  │
└─────────────┘                └─────────────┘
       ▲                              │
       │         dispatches           │
       └──────────────────────────────┘
                 events
----

* **Controller**: Holds all application state and provides methods to modify it
* **View**: A pure function that reads state from the controller and returns an `Element`
* **Events**: Dispatched to the controller, which updates state

== The Controller

The controller is a plain Java class that encapsulates your application state:

[source,java]
----
import dev.tamboui.widgets.input.TextInputState;

public class TodoController {
    private final List<TodoItem> items = new ArrayList<>();
    private final TextInputState inputState = new TextInputState();
    private int selectedIndex = 0;
    private boolean inputMode = false;

    public record TodoItem(String text, boolean done) {}

    // Queries (read state)
    public List<TodoItem> items() { return List.copyOf(items); }
    public int selectedIndex() { return selectedIndex; }
    public TextInputState inputState() { return inputState; }
    public boolean isInputMode() { return inputMode; }

    // Commands (modify state)
    public void moveUp() {
        if (selectedIndex > 0) selectedIndex--;
    }

    public void moveDown() {
        if (selectedIndex < items.size() - 1) {
            selectedIndex++;
        }
    }

    public void toggleSelected() {
        if (!items.isEmpty()) {
            var item = items.get(selectedIndex);
            items.set(selectedIndex, new TodoItem(item.text(), !item.done()));
        }
    }

    public void deleteSelected() {
        if (!items.isEmpty()) {
            items.remove(selectedIndex);
            if (selectedIndex >= items.size() && selectedIndex > 0) {
                selectedIndex--;
            }
        }
    }

    public void startInput() { inputMode = true; }
    public void cancelInput() { inputMode = false; inputState.clear(); }

    public void submitInput() {
        if (inputState.length() > 0) {
            items.add(new TodoItem(inputState.text(), false));
            selectedIndex = items.size() - 1;
        }
        inputMode = false;
        inputState.clear();
    }
}
----

=== Controller Design Principles

* **Queries** are pure read-only methods that return state
* **Commands** modify state and have no return value
* Return defensive copies of collections (`List.copyOf()`)
* Keep state private, expose through methods

== The View

The view is a pure function that transforms controller state into UI elements:

[source,java]
----
import static dev.tamboui.toolkit.Toolkit.*;

public class TodoView {
    private final TodoController controller;

    public TodoView(TodoController controller) {
        this.controller = controller;
    }

    public Element render() {
        return panel("Todo List",
            renderList(),
            spacer(),
            renderInput(),
            renderHelp()
        ).rounded().id("main").focusable();
    }

    private Element renderList() {
        var items = controller.items();
        if (items.isEmpty()) {
            return text("No items. Press 'a' to add one.").dim().italic();
        }

        var elements = new Element[items.size()];
        for (int i = 0; i < items.size(); i++) {
            elements[i] = renderItem(i, items.get(i));
        }
        return column(elements);
    }

    private Element renderItem(int index, TodoController.TodoItem item) {
        var checkbox = item.done() ? "[x]" : "[ ]";
        var element = text(checkbox + " " + item.text());

        if (index == controller.selectedIndex()) {
            element = element.reversed();
        }
        if (item.done()) {
            element = element.dim().crossedOut();
        }
        return element;
    }

    private Element renderInput() {
        if (!controller.isInputMode()) {
            return text("");
        }
        return row(
            text("New: ").cyan(),
            textInput(controller.inputState()).fill()
        );
    }

    private Element renderHelp() {
        if (controller.isInputMode()) {
            return text("[Enter] Save  [Esc] Cancel").dim();
        }
        return text("[a] Add  [Space] Toggle  [d] Delete  [j/k] Navigate  [q] Quit").dim();
    }
}
----

=== View Design Principles

* Views are **pure functions**: `Controller → Element`
* No side effects in render methods
* All state comes from the controller
* Conditional rendering based on controller state

== Event Handling

=== Using Lambda Handlers

For simple applications, attach handlers directly:

[source,java]
----
import static dev.tamboui.toolkit.Toolkit.handleTextInputKey;

public class TodoApp {
    public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception {
        var controller = new TodoController();
        var view = new TodoView(controller);

        try (var runner = ToolkitRunner.create()) {
            runner.run(() ->
                view.render()
                    .onKeyEvent(event -> handleEvent(event, controller))
            );
        }
    }

    private static EventResult handleEvent(KeyEvent event, TodoController ctrl) {
        if (ctrl.isInputMode()) {
            return handleInputMode(event, ctrl);
        }
        return handleNormalMode(event, ctrl);
    }

    private static EventResult handleInputMode(KeyEvent event, TodoController ctrl) {
        if (event.isCancel()) {
            ctrl.cancelInput();
            return EventResult.HANDLED;
        }
        if (event.isSelect()) {
            ctrl.submitInput();
            return EventResult.HANDLED;
        }
        if (handleTextInputKey(ctrl.inputState(), event)) {
            return EventResult.HANDLED;
        }
        return EventResult.UNHANDLED;
    }

    private static EventResult handleNormalMode(KeyEvent event, TodoController ctrl) {
        if (event.isChar('a')) { ctrl.startInput(); return EventResult.HANDLED; }
        if (event.isUp()) { ctrl.moveUp(); return EventResult.HANDLED; }
        if (event.isDown()) { ctrl.moveDown(); return EventResult.HANDLED; }
        if (event.isSelect()) { ctrl.toggleSelected(); return EventResult.HANDLED; }
        if (event.isChar('d')) { ctrl.deleteSelected(); return EventResult.HANDLED; }
        return EventResult.UNHANDLED;
    }
}
----

=== Separate Key Handler Class

For complex applications, extract event handling:

[source,java]
----
public class TodoKeyHandler {
    private final TodoController controller;

    public TodoKeyHandler(TodoController controller) {
        this.controller = controller;
    }

    public EventResult handle(KeyEvent event) {
        if (controller.isInputMode()) {
            return handleInputMode(event);
        }
        return handleNormalMode(event);
    }

    private EventResult handleInputMode(KeyEvent event) {
        if (event.isCancel()) {
            controller.cancelInput();
            return EventResult.HANDLED;
        }
        if (event.isConfirm()) {
            controller.submitInput();
            return EventResult.HANDLED;
        }
        // ... handle text input
        return EventResult.UNHANDLED;
    }

    private EventResult handleNormalMode(KeyEvent event) {
        if (event.isChar('a')) {
            controller.startInput();
            return EventResult.HANDLED;
        }
        // ... more handlers
        return EventResult.UNHANDLED;
    }
}
----

=== Event Result

Return values control event propagation:

* `EventResult.HANDLED` - Event was processed, stop propagation
* `EventResult.UNHANDLED` - Event was not processed, continue routing

== Focus Management

=== Making Elements Focusable

Both `id()` AND `focusable()` are required:

[source,java]
----
panel("Panel A")
    .id("panel-a")          // Unique identifier (REQUIRED)
    .focusable()            // Enable focus (REQUIRED)
    .borderColor(Color.GRAY)
    .focusedBorderColor(Color.CYAN)  // Visual feedback
----

=== Focus Navigation

[cols="1,2",options="header"]
|===
|Key |Action

|Tab
|Focus next element

|Shift+Tab
|Focus previous element

|Mouse click
|Focus clicked element

|ESC
|Clear focus (if no element handles it)
|===

=== Multi-Panel Applications

[source,java]
----
column(
    panel("Settings")
        .id("settings")
        .focusable()
        .onKeyEvent(event -> handleSettingsKey(event, controller)),

    panel("Actions")
        .id("actions")
        .focusable()
        .onKeyEvent(event -> handleActionsKey(event, controller))
)
----

== Dialogs and Overlays

=== The Dialog Element

[source,java]
----
var inputDialog = dialog("New Directory",
    text("Enter name:"),
    textInput(inputState),
    text("[Enter] Confirm  [Esc] Cancel").dim()
).rounded()
 .borderColor(Color.CYAN)
 .width(50)
 .onConfirm(() -> createDirectory(inputState.text()))
 .onCancel(() -> dismissDialog());
----

=== Implementing Custom Overlay

For custom dialogs, implement `Element` directly:

[source,java]
----
public class MyView implements Element {
    private final MyController controller;

    @Override
    public void render(Frame frame, Rect area, RenderContext context) {
        // 1. Render main UI
        var ui = column(header(), content(), footer());
        ui.render(frame, area, context);

        // 2. Render dialog on top (if present)
        if (controller.hasDialog()) {
            renderDialog(frame, area, context);
        }
    }

    private void renderDialog(Frame frame, Rect area, RenderContext context) {
        int dialogWidth = 50;
        int dialogHeight = 6;
        int x = (area.width() - dialogWidth) / 2;
        int y = (area.height() - dialogHeight) / 2;
        var dialogArea = new Rect(area.x() + x, area.y() + y, dialogWidth, dialogHeight);

        // Clear area first
        frame.renderWidget(Clear.INSTANCE, dialogArea);

        // Render dialog panel
        var dialog = panel("Confirm",
            text(controller.dialogMessage()),
            text("[y] Yes  [n] No  [Esc] Cancel").dim()
        ).rounded().borderColor(Color.YELLOW);

        dialog.render(frame, dialogArea, context);
    }

    @Override
    public EventResult handleKeyEvent(KeyEvent event, boolean focused) {
        // ESC should dismiss dialog, not clear focus
        if (event.isCancel() && controller.hasDialog()) {
            controller.dismissDialog();
            return EventResult.HANDLED;
        }
        // ... other handling
        return EventResult.UNHANDLED;
    }
}
----

== Complete Example

[source,java]
----
import dev.tamboui.toolkit.app.ToolkitRunner;
import dev.tamboui.toolkit.element.Element;
import dev.tamboui.toolkit.event.EventResult;
import dev.tamboui.style.Color;
import dev.tamboui.tui.TuiConfig;
import dev.tamboui.tui.event.KeyCode;
import dev.tamboui.tui.event.KeyEvent;

import java.util.ArrayList;
import java.util.List;

import static dev.tamboui.toolkit.Toolkit.*;

public class TodoApp {

    // ═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════
    // CONTROLLER
    // ═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

    static class Controller {
        public record Item(String text, boolean done) {}

        private final List<Item> items = new ArrayList<>();
        private final StringBuilder input = new StringBuilder();
        private int cursor = 0;
        private boolean editing = false;

        public List<Item> items() { return List.copyOf(items); }
        public int cursor() { return cursor; }
        public String input() { return input.toString(); }
        public boolean isEditing() { return editing; }
        public boolean isEmpty() { return items.isEmpty(); }

        public void cursorUp() { if (cursor > 0) cursor--; }
        public void cursorDown() { if (cursor < items.size() - 1) cursor++; }

        public void toggle() {
            if (!items.isEmpty()) {
                var item = items.get(cursor);
                items.set(cursor, new Item(item.text(), !item.done()));
            }
        }

        public void delete() {
            if (!items.isEmpty()) {
                items.remove(cursor);
                if (cursor >= items.size() && cursor > 0) cursor--;
            }
        }

        public void startEditing() { editing = true; }
        public void cancelEditing() { editing = false; input.setLength(0); }
        public void typeChar(char c) { input.append(c); }
        public void backspace() {
            if (input.length() > 0) input.setLength(input.length() - 1);
        }

        public void submit() {
            if (input.length() > 0) {
                items.add(new Item(input.toString(), false));
                cursor = items.size() - 1;
            }
            editing = false;
            input.setLength(0);
        }
    }

    // ═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════
    // VIEW
    // ═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

    static class View {
        private final Controller ctrl;

        View(Controller ctrl) { this.ctrl = ctrl; }

        Element render() {
            return panel("Todo List",
                ctrl.isEmpty() ? emptyState() : itemList(),
                spacer(),
                inputArea(),
                helpBar()
            ).rounded().borderColor(Color.DARK_GRAY)
             .focusedBorderColor(Color.CYAN)
             .id("main").focusable();
        }

        private Element emptyState() {
            return text("No items yet. Press 'a' to add one.").dim().italic();
        }

        private Element itemList() {
            var items = ctrl.items();
            var elements = new Element[items.size()];
            for (int i = 0; i < items.size(); i++) {
                elements[i] = itemRow(i, items.get(i));
            }
            return column(elements);
        }

        private Element itemRow(int index, Controller.Item item) {
            var prefix = item.done() ? "[x] " : "[ ] ";
            var elem = text(prefix + item.text());

            if (index == ctrl.cursor()) elem = elem.reversed();
            if (item.done()) elem = elem.dim().crossedOut();

            return elem;
        }

        private Element inputArea() {
            if (!ctrl.isEditing()) return text("");
            return row(
                text("New: ").cyan(),
                text(ctrl.input() + "_").bold()
            );
        }

        private Element helpBar() {
            var help = ctrl.isEditing()
                ? "[Enter] Save  [Esc] Cancel"
                : "[a] Add  [Space] Toggle  [d] Delete  [j/k] Move  [q] Quit";
            return text(help).dim();
        }
    }

    // ═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════
    // EVENT HANDLER
    // ═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

    static EventResult handleKey(KeyEvent event, Controller ctrl) {
        if (ctrl.isEditing()) {
            if (event.isCancel()) { ctrl.cancelEditing(); return EventResult.HANDLED; }
            if (event.isSelect()) { ctrl.submit(); return EventResult.HANDLED; }
            if (event.code() == KeyCode.CHAR && event.character() >= 32) {
                ctrl.typeChar(event.character());
                return EventResult.HANDLED;
            }
            if (event.code() == KeyCode.BACKSPACE) {
                ctrl.backspace();
                return EventResult.HANDLED;
            }
            return EventResult.UNHANDLED;
        }

        if (event.isChar('a')) { ctrl.startEditing(); return EventResult.HANDLED; }
        if (event.isUp()) { ctrl.cursorUp(); return EventResult.HANDLED; }
        if (event.isDown()) { ctrl.cursorDown(); return EventResult.HANDLED; }
        if (event.isSelect()) { ctrl.toggle(); return EventResult.HANDLED; }
        if (event.isChar('d')) { ctrl.delete(); return EventResult.HANDLED; }
        return EventResult.UNHANDLED;
    }

    // ═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════
    // MAIN
    // ═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

    public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception {
        var controller = new Controller();
        var view = new View(controller);

        // Add sample data
        controller.items.add(new Controller.Item("Learn TamboUI", false));
        controller.items.add(new Controller.Item("Build awesome apps", false));

        try (var runner = ToolkitRunner.create()) {
            runner.run(() ->
                view.render()
                    .onKeyEvent(e -> handleKey(e, controller))
            );
        }
    }
}
----

== Benefits of This Architecture

[cols="1,3",options="header"]
|===
|Benefit |Description

|Testable
|Controller can be unit tested without any UI

|Reusable
|Same controller can power different views

|Predictable
|State changes only through controller methods

|Debuggable
|Easy to log/inspect state transitions

|Maintainable
|Clear separation of concerns
|===

== Next Steps

* Explore the link:widgets.html[Widgets Reference] for available components
* Learn about link:bindings.html[Bindings and Actions] for handling user input
* Read the link:developer-guide.html[Developer Guide] for creating custom widgets
* See the link:api-levels.html[API Levels] for alternative approaches
